---
title: Figure 80
layout: entry
order: 1080
object:
  - id: "080"
---

X-radiographs of experimental casts after the same model of Apollo using three different lost-wax casting processes. The heads were produced by beginners during the 2016 CAST:ING meeting at the Coubertin foundry, France, and can therefore not claim to be representative of features in expertly cast historical bronzes, but present a few noteworthy features. 1a–b) Side and frontal views of the same head produced by the slush molding process. They show the relatively even thickness of metal wall that follows the contours of the molding. The frontal view shows the drips that formed in the neck (turquoise overlay) on the internal surface when the excess liquefied wax was poured out of the reusable mold. The solid spheres on the top of this and the other casts are from air bubbles trapped along the inner surface when the fresh plaster-based core slurry was poured into the mold (orange overlay dots). 2) Unlike the head in 1a, this cast of the Apollo head is more uneven, as seen in particular in the facial area, where the flattened shape of the inner surface is the result of a rather thick clay slab (the “lasagna”) that was initially laid into the reusable mold to create the negative space to be filled by the bronze. 3) The frontal view of the third experimental cast shows the overall even thickness of the metal wall that results from the use of the thin wax slabs pressed into the mold. The joint of several of the wax slabs runs vertically down the face and back of the head (blue overlay lines). See also [fig. 121](/visual-atlas/121/). The height of the casts is 18 cm (two-thirds of the original size). Original: *Apollo of Lillebonne*, France, 1st century BCE–1st century CE, H. 193 cm (Musée du Louvre, inv. Br37 [NIII65]). See [fig. 288](/visual-atlas/288/).
