---
title: Figure 304
layout: entry-embed
order: 1304
outputs: [ html ]
object:
  - id: "304"
render: ./_render/fig-304--svg.md
---

Decision tree for the preliminary investigation and characterization of plating by visual examination.

<div class="backmatter">

<details class="image-description">

<summary>Full Text</summary>

**PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION OF PLATING BY VISUAL EXAMINATION**
(use a magnifying lens and good raking light; see text for details of the plating techniques mentioned)

Identify the color of the body metal of the sculpture. Look for metallic areas of a different color than the body metal and/or bright metal within corrosion layers.

Note: There may be more than one type of plating present. Use elemental analysis if available (e.g., XRF or spot tests) to identify the plating material and the sculpture metal (see [table 10](/tables/10/)).

**If there is plating inside a hollow sculpture:** suspect electroplating (but small splashes or runs may be amalgam plating if mercury is detected, or fusion plating if it has a cast structure and no mercury).

**If there is evidence of rivets, grooves, or other fixings:** suspect mechanical foil gilding. Look for fragments of foil, and/or try X-radiography.

**If there is scoring on the sculpture:** suggests close plating with silver foil or foils added as local repairs.

**If there is a gesso coating on the sculpture:** look for leaf gilding.

**If the plating has straight edges and/or square shapes:** leaf gilding likely. Undertake elemental analysis: Is it gold, or copper + zinc (Dutch leaf)? Silver or tin?

**If the plating is flaking off:** indicative of deterioration of adhesive used for leaf gilding.

**If the plating is blistering:** a problem of electroplating, but also caused by corrosion under most plating.

**If the plating has a granular texture:** suspect paint; also look for brushstrokes, drips, etc. (see [I.8](/vol-1/8/)).

**If there are metal runs and drips:** suspect amalgam plating (check for mercury) or fusion plating.

**If only selected areas are plated:** leaf, paint, amalgam, or electroplating (using a masking material) are possible.

**If a gilding layer is worn on high points but not flaking:** suggests amalgam (test for mercury) or electroplating (look for blistering).

**If gilding is well bonded but thin:** suggests amalgam (test for mercury; if none, diffusion bonding or electroplating are possible).

The next stage of investigation would be to take a sample that provides a cross section of the plating in relation to the substrate metal. See [II.6](/vol-2/6/).

</details>

</div>