---
title: Acknowledgments
order: 40
layout: page
---

This publication is the fruit of a years-long collaboration of a broad international, interdisciplinary community. Throughout the process of the project’s development and culmination, its members have drawn on the support of an extensive network of individuals and organizations. First and foremost the Editorial team would like to thank the various members of the Steering Committee, which has evolved in composition over the years, for joining them in this endeavor and for their indispensable contributions to the shaping of the overall project and of these Guidelines. These include Brian Considine, Pete Dandridge, Susanne Gänsicke, Philippe Malgouyres, Benoit Mille, Ruven Pillay, Frits Scholten, Donna Strahan, and Jeremy Warren. 

The editorial committee would especially like to thank the sponsors and hosts of the meetings and workshops organized to convene CAST:ING members on a yearly basis, starting with the launch meeting, which coincided with the Nineteenth International Bronze Congress on Ancient Bronzes at the J. Paul Getty Museum in Los Angeles (October 2015), followed by the second gathering in France (July 2016) at the Fondation et Fonderie de Coubertin. Meetings were held in May of 2017 at both the Centre de recherche et de restauration des musées de France (C2RMF), Paris, and the National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C. The January 2018 meeting in Cambodia was organized by Brice Vincent of the École française d’Extrême-Orient, Paris, and the CAST:ING members were hosted in turn by the APSARA National Authority, Siem Reap, the National Museum of Cambodia, Phnom Penh, IT Sopheap’s Art Foundry, Siem Reap, and the Royal University of Fine Arts, Phnom Penh. A special meeting focused on patina was organized in Paris (September 2018) and hosted by the Laboratoire de recherche des monuments historiques. The Getty and C2RMF were also the welcoming venues of several smaller editorial meetings. We are grateful to Art Fund for awarding Peta Motture a Jonathan Ruffer curatorial grant, which allowed her to attend the Getty and Coubertin meetings. 

We owe the French Culture Ministry a great thanks for supporting the creation and maintenance of the CAST:ING project’s website [http://www.cast-ing.org/](http://www.cast-ing.org/), which has served as a key tool almost from the inception of the project. It has captured the activities and extensive vocabulary and image databases from which selections included in the publication were made. Ruven Pillay, Dominique Dupuis-Labbé and Vincent Lefèvre have been instrumental in those efforts. 

We gratefully acknowledge all the contributors to the contents and writing of this work by listing them along with the authors in their respective sections. With few exceptions the contributors are members of CAST:ING. Through their writing and/or participation in the planning or discussion meetings and other conversations over the years, this publication is based on the expertise and support of this group’s members: Denise Allen, Elena Arias, Antoine Amarger, Bastian Asmus, Aurélia Azéma, Pierre Baptiste, Christophe Béry, Ann Boulton, Clotilde Boust, Genevieve Bresc-Bautier, Valérie Carpentier, Manon Castelle, Yi Chen, Annabelle Collinet, Pete Dandridge, Isabel Delgado, Sophie Descamps-Lequime, Jean Dubos, Nicolas Escanilla Artigua, Susanne Gänsicke, Laurence Garenne-Marot, Samnang Huot, Joachim Kreutner, Elsa Lambert, Emmanuel Lamouche, Susan LaNiece, Elisabeth Lebon, Jeff Maish, Carol Mattusch, Mathilde Mechling, Benoît Mille, Lorenzo Morigi, Ruven Pillay, Barbara Plankensteiner, Chandra Reedy, David Reid, Dominique Robcis, Lise Saussu, Dylan Smith, Donna Strahan, Shelley Sturman, Annick Texier, Nicolas Thomas, Brice Vincent, Jeremy Warren, Ittai Weinryb, the late Jean-Marie Welter, and Changping Zhang.

In addition to those listed above, we wish to thank others who contributed their invaluable advice, expertise and feedback at various stages of the project, including Victoria Avery, Peter Barnet, Tony Beentjes, Andrew Butterfield, Yannick Chastang, Peggy Ellis, Deena Engel, Robert Erdmann, James H. Franz, Irene Gunston, Sharon Hecker, Catherine Hooper, Susan Jenkins, Emma Jones, Robert van Langh, Marjee Levine, Sîan Lewis, Linda Ying-Chun Lin, Philippe Malgouyres, Jonathan Marsden, Arie Pappot, Gary Radlke, Frits Scholten, Harold Schulze, Pamela H. Smith, Jeffrey Springer, the late Richard E. Stone, Iskra Karniš Vidovič, Quanyu Wang, Frank Willer, and Dimitrios Zikos.

We are greatly indebted to colleagues at our individual institutions for their most valuable support. At the C2RMF: Anne Bouquillon, Stéphanie Courtier, Yvan Coquinot, Victor Etgens, Vanessa Fournier, Mireille Klein, Alexis Komenda, Marie Lionnet de Loitiėre, Jean-Michel Loyer-Hascoët, Anne Maigret, Michel Menu, François Mirambet, Astrid Moitrieux, Isabelle Pallot-Frossard, Emmanuel Plé, and Pascale Richardin. At the Harvard Art Museums and Harvard University: Susanne Ebbinghaus, Katherine Eremin, Narayan Khandekar, Josef Koerner, David Odo, Sara Schechner, Martha Tedeschi and former colleagues Henri Lie, Jessica Martinez, and Tony Sigel. At Getty: Murtha Baca, Deni Bernhart, Kellie Boss, Jessica Chasen, Brian Considine, Madeline Corona, James Cuno, Anne-Lise Desmas, B. J. Farrar, Patricia Harpring, Kenneth Lapatin, Lynn Lee, Timothy Potts, Richard Rand, Erik Risser, Tina Segler, Marie Svoboda, and Julie Wolfe. At the Victoria and Albert Museum: Kira d’Alburquerque, Nicholas Barnard, Antonia Boström, Lucia Burgio, the late John Clarke, the late Diana Heath, Tristram Hunt, Gregory Irvine, Beth McKillop, Anthony Misquitta, Angus Patterson, Boris Pretzel, James Robinson, the late Martin Roth, Lois Salter, Holly Trusted, Joanne Whalley, Paul Williamson, and Michaela Zöschg. 

Special acknowledgment goes to Getty Publications team members Erin Cecele Dunigan, Molly McGeehan, Chloe Millhauser, Dina Murokh, Kelly Peyton, Nancy Rivera, Leslie Rollins, and freelance copyeditor Lindsey Westbrook for their essential contributions to an admittedly challenging project and to Kara Kirk, Karen Levine, and Nola Butler for their support. Thanks are due to cover designer Kurt Hauser as well as graphic designers Hespenheide Design and Antony Paular Design for their contributions to the overall style of the publication. We’d also like to thank the staff at Getty Digital for the technical work they did on Quire to build this publication’s many features, in particular Matthew Hrudka, Hannah Balenda, Anders Pollack, and Neal Johnson, though certainly it takes a village. We owe our deepest gratitude to senior editor Ruth Evans Lane and digital publications manager Greg Albers who have worked with us tirelessly to translate our complex, multidimensional and multimodule offering into a handsome, an interactive, and a highly accessible online publication as well as a paperback. Most importantly, we gratefully acknowledge the infinite patience and support of our friends and families throughout this endeavor, a sacrifice made even greater by the complication of time zones. 

CAST:ING editorial committee:

David Bourgarit
Jane Bassett
Francesca G. Bewer
Arlen Heginbotham
Andrew Lacey
Peta Motture
