---
label: Case Study 5
title: One Commission, Two Sculptors, How Many Founders?
subtitle: A Technical Study of Three Renaissance Statues from the Monument of the Heart of Duke Anne de Montmorency
order: 350
layout: case-study
presentation: side-by-side
object:
  - id: "case-study-5"
contributor:
  - id: mcastelle
    sort_as: "1"
  - id: dbourgarit
    sort_as: "2"
abstract: "Commissioned in 1571, the Monument of the Heart of Duke Anne de Montmorency (French, 1493–1567), Constable of France, includes three life-size bronze statues. These were made by two sculptors, Barthélémy Prieur and Martin Lefort. In the archives, only one founder, Nicolas Péron, is associated with the casting of two of the statues. A technical investigation of the statues, including metal and core analysis and visual and radiographic examinations, was undertaken to discern whether Péron might have cast all three and to shed light on the relationship between the sculptors and the founder(s), which was crucial in this period of Renaissance bronze statuary."
---

<section class="slide" data-title="Introduction">

## Introduction

Commissioned in 1571, the Monument of the Heart of Duke Anne de Montmorency (French, 1493–1567), Constable of France, includes three life-size {% def "bronze" %} statues. These were made by two sculptors, Barthélémy Prieur (French, 1536–1611) and Martin Lefort (French, active 1562–82). In the archives, only one {% def "founder" %}, Nicolas Péron, is associated with the casting of two of the statues. A technical investigation of the statues, including metal and {% def "core" %} analysis and visual and radiographic examinations, was undertaken to discern whether Péron might have {% def "cast (v.)" "cast" %} all three and to shed light on the relationship between the sculptors and the founder(s), which was crucial in this period of Renaissance bronze statuary.

**Fig-523**

</section>
<section class="slide" data-title="The commission">

## The commission

In 1571, Madeleine of Savoy, Anne de Montmorency’s wife, commissioned the architect Jean Bullant (French, 1515–1578) to produce a funerary monument for the heart of her husband. The monument, now in the Louvre, is composed of a sculpted stone column that would originally have been topped by an urn containing the heart. Bronze allegorical personifications of Abundance, Peace, and Justice were situated around the base of the column as witnesses to the character of the deceased. Bullant charged two sculptors to produce the statues. Prieur was responsible for Abundance and Peace, and Lefort made Justice. Péron was commissioned to cast the statues by Prieur. There is no record of who cast Lefort’s.

</section>
<section class="slide" data-title="Main questions">

## Main questions

Considering the number of people who collaborated in the production of such sculptures (and there were no doubt more unnamed hands involved as well), can the physical evidence help clarify who was ultimately in charge of the production? In other words, does the technical evidence suggest that the same founder or different ones worked with the two sculptors to cast the three sculptures? Can comparison of the casting processes used for each of the statues help answer these questions? And what can the characterization and comparison of the materials used tell us with regard to these questions?

</section>
<section class="slide" data-title="Visual evidence">

## Visual evidence of lost-wax casting

Clear traces of {% def "lost-wax casting" %} include the modeling of details such as the vine leaf and grapes held by Abundance.

{% figuregroup '3' 'fig-051' %}

**Fig-070**

</section>
<section class="slide" data-title="">

It is also clear from an examination of the undersides of then sculptures, that all three are hollow {% def "cast (n.)" "casts" %} with relatively thick, uneven metal walls, still partially filled with the baked, sandy clay cores that were built around a system of iron {% def "armature" %} rods, as seen here in the interior of Peace.

**Fig-008**

</section>
<section class="slide" data-title="Internal evidence">

## Internal evidence of unique chaplets

The location of {% def "core supports" %} is nearly invisible on the radiographs. Endoscopic examination of the interior metal walls of Justice and Peace where the core had been removed revealed a rather unique feature in both: the raised outline of what looks like a rectangular bronze {% def "patch" %} with an integral faceted tapering point extending out from its center. That these features are idiosyncratic to these two casts is a strong indication of their production in the same foundry. No such {% def "chaplets" %} could be observed in the radiographs of Abundance due to the possible masking of the internal surface by the core.

**Fig-038**

</section>
<section class="slide" data-title="direct lost-wax cast?">

## A direct lost-wax cast?

Radiography of the statues showed the relatively thick metal walls and the shape of the preserved vestiges of the original armatures. Few wax-to-wax joints are visible, and the internal surfaces do not conform to external contours. The latter features suggest that the sculptures were directly cast.

{% figuregroup '3' 'fig-097, fig-524' %}

**Fig-034: With x-ray layer**

</section>
<section class="slide" data-title="Armature system">

## Armature system

The armature systems were mapped out based on the radiographs for each sculpture, to the extent possible. The gauge of iron rods seems similar in all three. Both of Prieur’s figures show that the core of the protruding arms was bound with wires. The Lefort figure does not have these, probably because the core was almost entirely removed.

{% figuregroup '3' 'fig-097, fig-524' %}

**Fig-034: With armature layer**

</section>
<section class="slide" data-title="indirect process—lasagna">

## The archives point to an indirect process—lasagna

The surviving contract between Prieur and Peron, however, mentions that the founder would produce the wax {% def "model" %} from a plaster {% def "piece mold" %} that the sculptor had made of his original model. All of the evidence now points to some version of the lasagna technique described by Benvenuto Cellini (Italian, 1500–1571; see [GI§2.3.2](/intro/#S2.3.2)).

**Fig-023**

</section>
<section class="slide" data-title="core composition">

## A characteristic core composition?

Some core could be sampled from underneath each statue.

**Fig-431**

</section>
<section class="slide" data-title="">

A new methodology based on the precise measurement of the size of the quartz inclusions in the clay core of bronze statues has shown that the cores of the three allegories were not only the same, but very specific with respect to sixteenth- and seventeenth-century Parisian bronzes analyzed to date. Indeed, whereas the petrographic images do not show many differences, the distribution of sizes of quartz inclusions shows slight but clear differences.

{% figuregroup '3' 'fig-427, fig-428' %}

**Fig-525**

</section>
<section class="slide" data-title="">

Whereas in most sixteenth- and seventeenth-century Parisian bronzes, two sizes of inclusions coexist (very small inclusions of around 5 µm in diameter and much larger ones, up to 150 µm in diameter), in the allegories only the large inclusions are present (100–200 µm).

{% figuregroup '3' 'fig-405, fig-406, fig-526, fig-527' %}

**Fig-274**

</section>
<section class="slide" data-title="The alloys">

## The alloys

Inductively coupled plasma with atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES; see [II.5§3.1](/vol-2/5/#S3.1)) analysis of a sample drilled from each statue revealed that Prieur’s Abundance and Peace are made of tin-bronze, whereas Lefort’s Justice is made of {% def "brass" %}. Moreover, the very different impurity patterns suggest disparate copper ore sources. If Péron cast all three sculptures, he would have been responsible for preparing and {% def "pouring" %} the metal. How then to explain the variation in the alloy types?

**Fig-528**

</section>
<section class="slide" data-title="Summary of findings">

## <span class="cs-category">Summary of findings:</span> A unique founder?

The three figures were cast by a similar method using idiosyncratic chaplets and a similar core composition, which strongly suggests that they were cast by the same founder. The variation in metal composition would suggest, however, that a different founder was involved. All of Prieur’s large bronzes that were cast in France are made of tin-bronze. It is possible that he imposed his choice of alloy on the founder. Conversely, Lefort was of less renown, with no documented previous experience in casting, and so he might have left it up to Péron to work with his preferred alloy, which we assume was brass (this of course is only a hypothesis; we unfortunately have no record of other productions by Péron).

In the end, the sculptors’ different backgrounds and status led us to speculate that the choice of bronze alloy adopted for Prieur’s two figures may have been linked to the artist's exposure to practices he encountered in Italy, and that the founder Péron was willing and able to successfully execute the casts for the monument in both alloys.

**Fig-523**

</section>
<section class="slide" data-title="Synopsis">

## Synopsis of technical parameters

The study was carried out at the C2RMF as a public service to French museums, and the procedures undertaken by staff unless indicated. Its total duration was more than one hundred person-days, as part of Manon Castelle’s PhD research. The study consisted of:

- visual examination: Manon Castelle, David Bourgarit, and Francesca G. Bewer (Harvard Art Museums). This was one of the most time-consuming steps in the study.

- daylight photography: Dominique Bagault and Anne Maigret. Of the circa 100 photos taken per statue, about half were selected.

- X-radiography: Thierry Borel, Jean Marsac, and Elsa Lambert. The particularly large thickness of the metal wall and the core filling created a very dense barrier that pushed the X-ray facilities of the C2RMF to their limit.

- endoscopy: Manon Castelle. Alas, the image resolution of the files produced was insufficient for publication.

- bulk metal analyses by atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES): Nathalie Gandolfo, Jessica Legendre, Benoit Mille, and David Bourgarit.

- core analysis: Manon Castelle and Yvan Coquinot. In the framework of Castelle’s PhD work, this study offered the opportunity to develop a new protocol detailed in [II.7§2.2.4](/vol-2/7/#S2.2.4/).

For more on the operating conditions see {% cite "Castelle 2016" %}; {% cite "Castelle, Bourgarit, and Bewer 2018" %}; {% cite "Seelig-Teuwen, Bourgarit, and Bewer 2014" %}. For more on the techniques of examination and scientific analysis see volume II.

</section>
<section class="slide" data-title="Further questions">

## Further questions

- What was the original {% def "patina" %} of the statues? Was it the same for all three?

- What was Péron’s training and production prior to the casting of the allegories? Such information might provide insight into his alloy preference and approach to casting sculpture.

</section>
<section class="slide" data-title="Further resources">

## Further resources

{% cite "Bewer, Bourgarit, and Bassett 2009" %}

{% cite "Bresc-Bautier and Scherf 2008" %}

{% cite "Castelle 2016" %}

{% cite "Castelle, Bourgarit, and Bewer 2018" %}

{% cite "Castelle, Coquinot, and Bourgarit 2016" %}

{% cite "Castelle et al. 2021" %}

{% cite "Grodecki 1986" %}, 134, 135

{% cite "Seelig-Teuwen, Bourgarit, and Bewer 2014" %}

</section>
