---
label: Chapter 1
title: Casting Processes
weight: 101
contributors:
  - id: fbewer
  - id: dreid
  - id: pmotture
  - id: dbourgarit
---

This chapter serves as a guide to distinguishing disparate telltale features that relate to the process by which a desired **model** is translated into **bronze**---a sequence of steps up to the **pouring** of the bronze that we will refer to here as the **casting** process. The chapter focuses on the two most common approaches used to **cast** a bronze: lost-wax and sand casting.[^1] Within these broad categories there are a variety of alternative procedures[^2] whose traces are explained. These often display characteristic features that may be found by visual examination of the external and/or internal surfaces.[^3] However, many of the features that relate to the construction and structure of hollow bronzes---diagnostic variations in the thickness of the bronze, or evidence of the various metal inserts such as **core supports** and **armatures**---will only be revealed through radiography. The description of each process will, therefore, fall into three sections: evidence on the outer surface, evidence on the inner surface, and radiographic evidence. A synthesis of all physical evidence related to the different processes is presented in Table 6.

The way in which the metal was designed to flow through the **refractory mold** is called here the "casting disposition". Though most traces of this step, such as **sprues**, are removed during **fettling**, some do survive, and the chapter also provides guidance on how to identify those.

Warning: the following provides only an indication of which features related to specific casting processes might be encountered on a bronze. It does not offer firm evidence, and it is essential to consult those with expertise in the field for advice where required. For more, please read the Disclaimer in the General Introduction §4.2.

## 1 Characteristic features associated with lost-wax casting (and direct-life casting)

This section covers disparate lost-wax casting processes, as well as a few other methods that also use a model that is sacrificed in the course of creating the hollow matrix in the refractory mold into which the metal will be cast.

### 1.1 General evidence of lost-wax casting

Evidence of lost-wax casting may come from both the specificity of wax (used for the model or intermodel), and the possible particularities of the processes. Intricate shapes, the presence of complex undercuts, or very realistic textures in a cast may point to the use of such processes-- although this is not always the case.[^4]

The very nature of waxes means that they can be softened or melted by heat, and shaped in numerous ways, for example, modeling, carving, and casting. Therefore, bronzes that were produced from models made with wax often preserve traces of such manipulation, on both the exterior and interior.

Warning:

- a wax sculpture may not be necessarily translated into bronze using the lost-wax process;[^5]

- intricate shapes and undercuts may also be encountered in sand casting, and realistic textures could equally apply to direct life casting. Conversely, not all lost-wax casts display such features.

#### 1.1.1 Evidence on the outer surface 

Wax can easily be manipulated into a variety of shapes without tools: rolled into balls or coils, pinched into pointed tips, flattened and smeared, or just poured. Such shapes and certain marks---like the parallel lines left by a finger's print as it pushes wax across the surface---may be clearly captured in soft wax, and later translated into bronze (figs. 777, 778 and 926).

Furthermore, any number of tools may be used to shape, incise, stamp, or texture a wax model (see vol. 1, ch. 6). In most cases it is hard to tell what material the modeling tool is made from, but generally:

- wooden modeling tools will work with softer waxes.

- Metal tools, such as **punches**, pointed modeling tools, engraving tools, and files, are more successfully used on hardened wax when crisper details are required (figs. 5, 7 and 260). Either type of tool can be used to create signatures and **edition** marks. And **founders**' marks are traditionally stamped in the wax model before casting (see vol. 1, ch. 6).

#### 1.1.2 Evidence on the inner surface (for hollow casts)

Several types of feature are characteristic of lost-wax casting, and can be diagnostic of the exact process used (as will be elaborated upon in § 1.3 and 1.4 below):[^6]

- Drip marks and brushstrokes produced during the creation of the wax layer by an indirect lost-wax process such as slush molding (see § 1.2--1.4).

- A smooth internal surface that tends to be conformal with the outer one, which also often occurs with slush molding (figs. 902 and 903, and § 1.2--1.4).

- Uneven, thickened lips of metal around the circumference of a limb, sometimes accompanied by a distinct difference in wall thickness at that juncture, are often the result of wax-to-wax joins. These are created by fusing separately formed wax parts at the abutting edges using a hot tool. They are usually invisible from the outer surface since the wax model is generally refinished to unify the form and to conceal such features. The joins may be observed on the inner surface (fig. 430 and Case Study 4).

- Soft-edged lips of metal around **core pins** or core-pin holes that are formed when the core pin is pushed into a hollow wax model (fig. 920).

- Small spherical bobbles are often the result of air bubbles in an **investment** and **core** that are formed as a slurry (for example, plaster-based or ceramic shell) becoming trapped on the surface of the model and eventually being filled by the metal (figs. 810, 823, 927). The latter is clear evidence of lost-wax casting.

- Sharp, uneven fins of metal---or the jagged remains of those that have been coarsely cut down---tend to be flashes that occur when metal enters cracks that have formed in clay-based cores (fig. 122). These are typical of lost-wax casts. Conversely, cracks in sand-based cores---and consequently fins of metals on sand casts---tend to be less frequent and straighter.[^7]

*Risks of misidentification/misinterpretation*

- Wax-to-wax joins may be confused with metal assemblies (see vol. 1, ch. 5).

#### 1.1.3 Radiographic evidence 

Radiography may be the only way of detecting the aforementioned features if the internal walls of the bronze are not visible. This is particularly the case for the small spherical bobbles testifying to the use of a plaster core or ceramic shell (figs. 810 and 823, see vol. 2, ch. 7).

And because of their location on the interior, wax-to-wax joins are generally hard to see and often detectable only by these means. They usually generate a thickening and/or thinning of the metal around the circumference of a body part that has been attached, for example, below the shoulders, at the top of the thighs, and at the neck. They may appear on the radiograph as:

- a discontinuity in the metal wall thickness (fig. 375);

- different densities due to the resulting difference in thickness of the parts that are joined (fig. 375);

- a more or less straight line (fig. 848), or a circular or elliptic line (fig. 290);

*Risks of misidentification/misinterpretation*

- Wax-to-wax joins may be confused with core juncture (fig. 399-H).[^8]

The absence of most or all of these features does not preclude the possibility of a bronze sculpture being a lost-wax cast.

### 1.2 Evidence of direct versus indirect lost-wax casting

A distinction is made between a "direct cast", in which the original (wax) model is destroyed in the process of being translated into bronze (i.e., the wax is burnt out), and an "indirect cast", in which a wax **replica** of the original model is created for the purpose of casting (see inter-model; casting model; §2.2 in the General Introduction).

#### 1.2.1 Evidence on the outer surface 

In the case of most common **variants** of direct casting, the overall shape is modeled from the outer surface (fig. 579). This may leave specific marks on the outside, particularly when the modeling is made without tools. Among the characteristic features that point to modeling in wax without tools, the most easily recognized are:[^9]

- rolled threads and rods of different sizes, which are an almost universal visual design form (figs. 13, 155, 166, 463, 765, 769, 897 and 907);

- amorphous blobs of softened wax squished or pinched between two fingers (figs. 766, and 767).

Conversely, in the indirect lost-wax casting process, the wax model that is intended to be cast (here called the **inter-model**) is made from a mold. As a consequence, a firm identification of any feature relating to the mold used to create wax replicas allows us to reject the possibility that it is a direct cast. This includes:

- raised ridges, which may correspond to traces of the **piece-mold** possibly used to create a wax inter-model as part of the indirect process (figs. 107, 685, and 686);

- raised ridges, which may correspond to traces of the piece-mold possibly used to create a plaster model that was then used in an indirect process (fig. 878).

*Risks of misidentification/misinterpretation*

- The fact that the original model is modeled in wax -- and thus that the resulting bronze bears all aforementioned features -- does not necessarily imply a direct lost wax casting or even lost-wax casting. The existence of waxy features may relate to an earlier model one or more steps removed from the actual casting model. This would be the case, for instance, when a wax model is replicated in plaster, perhaps amended with more wax, and then cast into a bronze chef-model, which was in turn used to create a sand cast. This is notably the case for a number of Degas's sculptures (figs. 768 and 906).[^10]

- A number of wax models may be created by a combination of both indirect and direct processes. The outer surface of the inter-model is indeed often worked for finishing and/or adding or altering details, and/or potentially introducing variations in the different casts (fig. 463).[^11]

- If the original model is made of clay, similar evidence of modeling may be found on the final bronze as on a lost-wax cast (both clay and wax are soft materials that may be modeled in a similar way, see figs. 683 and 770). Sand casting may also be used to translate the clay model into bronze.

- **Seam lines** from the piece-mold used to make the wax may easily be confused with those produced by other processes using piece-molds (for example, sand casting and piece molding, see § 2).

- The remnants of **flashing** or feathering can look very similar to seam or mold lines once filed down (compare figs. 922 and 107).

#### 1.2.2 Evidence on the inner surface (for hollow casts)

It is not possible to identify clear evidence of direct casting on the inner surface of hollow casts. Notably, the internal contours of direct casts can vary widely, and can be smooth (see Case Study 2)[^12] or uneven. Moreover, there are unlikely to be:

- marks due to the working of wax on the inner surface of a direct cast;

- details of the core outer surface picked up by liquid wax and transferred onto the inner surface of the bronze.

An exception is the direct wax-slab process, or possibly the use of a "false core" (where the sculptor models over a core that is subsequently removed and replaced with another for casting).[^13]

However, whatever the variant of direct process, the internal surface of a direct cast may well have picked up tool marks, fingerprints, and other evidence of the preparation of the core.

#### 1.2.3 Radiographic evidence 

The degree of conformity of the inner and outer surface of the bronze reflects the level of attention to the overall thickness of the wax/bronze wall. Unevenness of metal wall thickness may reveal the less controlled build-up of a wax layer over a core by direct casting. However, there are ways of controlling the thickness even in a direct cast, either by using a cut-back core technique to shape the core,[^14] or by using preformed wax slabs (direct wax-slab process; see fig. 782). Conversely, indirect processes such as lasagna may lead to uneven thicknesses (see §1.4).

An armature reflecting the overall shape of the sculpture is more likely to be found in a direct cast (fig needed). Indeed, the armature constitutes the "skeleton" of the sculpture over which the model is designed. Conversely, in an indirect cast, the armature comes after the model (translated into a mold) and is only intended to strengthen the core.

A synthesis of all physical evidence related to the direct lost-wax process is presented in Table 6.

### 1.3 Characteristic features of slush molding, indirect wax-slab, wax painting processes 

These three types of indirect lost-wax processes share the creation of a core after the wax model is made (figs. 288, 783, and 785).[^15]

#### 1.3.1 Evidence on the outer surface

The particular kind of reusable mold used to form the wax inter-model may leave distinctive traces on the outer surface. Gelatin molds, rubber molds, and plaster piece-molds may create seam lines of different kinds (there may be seam lines from different processes on the same sculpture). These may, however, not be considered singular to these processes (see §1.2.1). See also §1.1.1 for the evidence common to all lost-wax processes.

#### 1.3.2 Evidence on the internal surface

The following features can point to any of the three processes:

- traces of working of the wax such as fingerprints and tool marks (figs. 158 and 773), such as those left by the hot spatulas that were used to melt together separate wax sections at the joins (see case Study 1 Dolphins);

- evidence of localized masses of soft wax pressed into areas that needed thickening (fig. 926);

- evidence of core pins, whether inserted from inside or outside. This may be revealed either directly by the pin head being inside (fig. 321),[^16] and/or by waxy drips if core pins/**chaplets** were heated and pushed into the hollow wax core;

- internal sprues (figs. 772 and 903).

The following features are characteristic of slush molding: 

- a smooth, flowing surface on the interior of the cast that echoes the outer contours quite closely while rounding out any sharp transitions (figs. 802, 902, and 903);

- tide lines and drips (fig. 903).

> With specific regard to the indirect wax-slab process, there may be an even thickening in the metal along a straight line resulting from the wax slabs being laid into the mold with a slight overlap. However, the authors do not know of any clear examples.
>
> Clear traces of brushes are evidence of the indirect wax-painting process (fig. 919).

*Risk of misidentification/misinterpretation*

- Drips may stem from heated pins (see above), or from wax slabs being cut by a hot tool (fig. 122), or (rarely) from thickening the edges of a hollow direct cast if it is possible to gain access to the interior, such as with the use of a false core (see § 1.2.2).

#### 1.3.3 Radiographic evidence 

The thinness of the wall and the conformity of the inner and outer contours are the most characteristic features of slush molding and indirect wax slabs. Radiography is the ideal tool to reveal this. It can even help to distinguish between the two processes because:

- slush molding leads to the rounding out of any sharp transitions (figs. 803 and 823);

- the impression of calibrated wax slabs yields much sharper transitions and may lead to the most even thicknesses one may encounter on a bronze (figs. 804, 805, and 823);

- the overlap of wax slabs (§1.3.2), typical of the indirect wax-slab process, may be best seen using radiography, although the authors do not know of any clear examples.

*Risk of misidentification/misinterpretation*

- Even and thin metal walls may be achieved by the direct wax slab process,

- **Seam lines** from the piece-mold used to make the wax may easily be confused with an overlap of wax slabs (figs. 876 and 877).

A synthesis of all physical evidence related to these processes is presented in Table 6.

### 1.4 Characteristic features of the cut-back core and lasagna processes

Unlike slush molding and indirect wax slabs, the core is made before the wax model. In both the cut-back-core process and the lasagna technique, the wax is filled around the core into the space created either by paring down the initial core or by the removal of the lasagna (figs. 489, 784, and General Introduction). A synthesis of all physical evidence related to these processes is presented in Table 6.

#### 1.4.1 Evidence on the external surface 

There is no specific evidence. See §1.1.1 for the evidence common to all lost-wax processes.

#### 1.4.2 Evidence on the internal surface 

The following evidence is common to both processes:

- The finer details of the modeling tend to be sacrificed as the shape of the core is simplified.

- Since there is no access to the internal surface of the wax model during the fabrication process (the core is already there), no waxy drips, tool marks, or fingerprints should be observed, as might be found with slush molding and indirect wax slabs.

> The following evidence is specific to the cut-back-core process:

- The paired down core often displays more angular transitions around the contours of the shapes (fig. 776).

- Any tool marks left from the paring down process may be captured in the metal surface (fig. 136; see vol.1, ch.6).

> The following evidence is specific to the lasagna process. In this process, the core is not pared down, but built up to fit the mold, thus possibly generating different features:

- The transitions around the contours of the shapes are very simplified if not absent, instead of being angular (fig. 818).

- Specific marks due to the working of the lasagna from inside may be captured, such as the overlapping of clay sheets (fig. 818).

*Risks of misidentification/misinterpretation*

- The method of producing a cut-back core closely resembles that used in sand casting and can therefore lead to possible confusion between the two.

- The rounded contours of the lasagna resemble those generated by slush molding or possibly by direct lost-wax casting (see Case Study 5).

#### 1.4.3 Radiographic evidence:

Both the lasagna and cut-back-core processes share some common radiographic features:

- Inner and outer surfaces of the bronze are not very conformal; the thickness of the bronze is not very even (figs. 546 and 823).

- Theoretically, there should be no wax-to-wax joins.[^17]

- Since the core is accessible before the wax is added, it may be reinforced, for example, by using wire wrapping or tethers, which would then be evident in a radiograph (fig. 540).

The differences between the two processes as evident through observation of the inner surface (see §1.4.2) may be seen on radiographs as well.

*Risks of misidentification/misinterpretation*

- Non-conformality of the interior/exterior surfaces, and thick and uneven metal walls are similar to those associated with direct casting (see Case Study 5).

- Instead of overlapping wax slabs, an even thickening of the metal along a straight section may testify to a wax-to-wax join.

It is possible that a variety of other indirect processes may have been used, which are not described in these Guidelines due to their rarity and/or lack of evidence.[^18]

### 1.5 Characteristic features of the direct life-casting process

This process shares common features with lost-wax casting as it entails investing organic materials that can be burned out of the mold (fig. 780 and General Introduction).

#### 1.5.1 Evidence on the external surface 

On the external surface, this process:

- produces a 1:1 scale of replication;[^19]

- reproduces the texture of the original in every detail---something that would be a challenge through the use of modeling (figs. 787, 788, and 833);[^20]

- may result in seam lines. Natural objects that do not burn out so readily like crab or crayfish are often piece-molded directly in the refractory material, which allows removal of the hard carburized remains. Therefore seam lines may appear on the bronze (fig. 833).

*Risk of misidentification/misinterpretation*

- It should not be confused with "cast from nature" or "indirect casting from life", that is indirect casts in which reusable molds are taken from such models in order to produce wax inter-models that can be altered further.[^21] It may be difficult to distinguish between a direct and an indirect life cast. For example, both may have seam lines.[^22]

#### 1.5.2 Radiographic evidence

Radiography is of no help.

*Risk of misidentification/misinterpretation*

- Bear in mind that a direct life cast can be hollow.[^23]

## 2 Characteristic features associated with sand casting (and piece-mold casting)

### 2.1 Characteristic features of sand casting

In sand casting, a special sand is pressed onto the **pattern** to create removable sections (fig. 779 and General Introduction, §2.4.1). Simple shapes may only require a two-piece mold (including medals and small reliefs); complex models will need more.

#### 2.1.1 Evidence on the outer surface

- Relative lack of undercuts suggest simplification of the mold to make piece molding (fig. 793).

- Roughness remaining on unfinished areas on the outer surface (for example, in hard to reach places) may represent the texture of a coarse, sand-molded surface before chasing (fig. 824).

- The division of the pattern into manageable segments to be separately cast will be different for sculptures that are to be sand molded, with relevant clues often evident in the casting plan (fig. 914).

- A thin, continuous, raised linear feature, which might be evidence of a mold seam line, may occur at the joint lines of piece-molded sections (see Case Study 3).

- An offset, stepped, linear feature that either follows an obvious piece-mold joint line, or disrupts/cuts across the modeling of an area of a cast could be evidence of a misaligned piece-mold (fig. 824).

*Risks of misidentification/misinterpretation*

- None of the above features is specific to sand casting. In particular, complex undercuts are able to be achieved in sand-casting (fig. 913)

- Identifying whether or not the casting plan is specific to sand casting requires particular skill, typically that of a founder.[^24]

- Surface roughness may be due to fine pitting caused by corrosion or acid cleaning.

- As-cast surface roughness due to sand molds (fig. 824) and clay molds (for example, the lost-wax process, figs. 26 and 484) may be hard to distinguish.

- Relative lack of undercuts may reflect the artist's composition rather than the process.

- As mentioned above for indirect lost-wax casting, the remnants of flashing or feathering can look very similar to seam lines once filed down (§1.2.1).

- Seam lines could equally testify to the use of piece-mold casting (see below §2.2). More generally, the possible variety of molds used during the whole making process---mold used for molding the original model, wax mold, refractory mold---may generate a variety of seam lines that may easily be confused.

#### 2.1.2 Evidence on the inner surface

The only feature that may be specific to sand casting is the grainy texture on the back/inside surface of a cast (figs. 477, 478, and 796).

The following features could also be observed inside or at the back of a sand cast, but are not specific to sand casting:

- Evidence of particular casting plans, often only visible from the inside as the finishing work used to conceal such joins was very artfully done (fig. 794).

- Raised inscriptions produced by carving into the core (fig. 526).

- Specific marks of tools used to pare down the core, although the authors are not aware of any examples.

- Geometrical/cut-back shapes of the inner surface resulting from the characteristic paring down of the core (figs. 796 and 902).

- Because of the sand core, there will be fewer and less sinuous core flashes compared to lost-wax casting (see §1.1.2). Also, rough granular surfaces on the inside of a hollow cast reproduces the sandy texture of the core material.

*Risks of misidentification/misinterpretation*

- The evidence of the core having been pared down (tool marks and/or shape) may also pertain to the cut-back core technique.

- Lost-wax casting may also generate few core flashes.

- Although sand casting is the most common reason for a course grainy texture, a rough clay core or coarse plaster core can leave a very similar appearance in the bronze.

#### 2.1.3 Radiographic evidence

Much of the aforementioned evidence will be visible on radiographs (metal joins and casting plan, shape of core, core flashes).

### 2.2 Piece-mold casting

The model is molded using several loam pieces. The piece-molds thus obtained may then be worked from the inside to create or enhance decoration, before being reassembled over the pared-down core (fig. 795 and Case Study 3).

#### 2.2.1 Evidence on the outer surface

- Undercuts in the model are avoided due to the rigidity of the fired clay mold.

- Seam lines develop along mold joins (figs. 6, 7, 8, 9 of case study 3).

- Evidence of the mold being carved from inside.

#### 2.2.1 Evidence on the inner surface

- Marks that indicate that the core has been shaved down (fig. 921)

#### 2.2.1 Radiographic evidence

- Walls of uneven thickness due to the shaving down of the core.

- Seam lines (see Case Study 3 Figure 5).

- Signs of chaplets (case study 3 Figure 4) or mold/core extension.

*Risk of misidentification/misinterpretation*

- All the aforementioned evidence may be encountered in other processes. The combination of a large number of these clues, however, may be indicative of this technique.

## 3 Characterization of features related to the armatures, core supports and casting disposition

### 3.1 Armatures and core supports

Different types of armatures and core supports (including core pins and chaplets) are generally, though not always, made of metal---and are designed to support the core during the casting process. This section aims to provide guidance for identifying their characteristics. Their functions are more fully described in the General Introduction (§2.6.2), together with the reasons for investigating them.[^25]

The features that provide a focus for documenting armatures and core supports are their shape, size, and placement, as well as the material from which they are made.[^26]

#### 3.1.1 Armatures

- Armatures may protrude from missing or fractured parts (fig. 525), or the thicker rods may project from the base or bottom of the sculpture and be used to mount the sculpture.

- The exposed sections of an iron armature rod that has been cut down flush to the surface may remain visible in the bronze surface and recognized by the build-up of rust, unless covered with patches (fig. 826) or a coating.

- Most often armatures are made of iron rods, in which case they may possibly be located with the aid of a magnet.

- The recurrence of sections with similar dimensions and profiles between different related sculptures may signal possible patterns in production.

- Wire acting as internal core support may be embedded in the core, and is usually only detectable by radiography (fig. 390).[^27]

*Risks of misidentification/misinterpretation*

- The absence of an armature does not mean that there was no armature.[^28]

- Several radiographic views may be necessary to determine the shape and location of an armature, but may not be sufficient to discern other physical evidence (for example, profiles) (fig. 540).

- Radiography may not always fully reveal armatures since iron (and wood) are less X-ray opaque than copper. Rusted iron is even less visible, and when rusted into laminated form may look like a sheaf of thinner rods. Access to the internal surface is ideal to confirm what is going on.

- Although there is a tendency to look for patterns and consistency in the materials used within a workshop, there are likely to be variations. Explaining these remains a matter of speculation. For instance, it is plausible that a founder will make use of whatever rods and wires he finds in the workshop.[^29] Also, the complexity of the armature is inevitably linked to the form of the sculpture (figs. 290 and 540).[^30]

- Relatively high amounts of iron in a copper alloy may be the cause of magnetic attraction.[^31]

#### 3.1.2 Core supports

Below are a few clues that characterize the categories of metal core supports: core pins, chaplets, and **mold extensions**, which are defined in the General Introduction.[^32] Evidence of their location includes:

- small areas of different colored metal---perhaps with rust or corrosion around rusty patches distributed around the sculpture;

- magnetic attraction, if ferrous and not fully rusted;

- ends of extant wires, rods or nails visible on the inside. A nail head on the inside means there was access to the interior to insert the nail---something occasionally found on larger sculptures (fig. 321);

- linear features in radiographs that stand out from the forms of the cast bronze (figs. 388 and 801);

- paired holes in a radiograph might indicate the use of transfixing core pins---mostly wires that pierce through the model from one side to the other ( fig. 848);

- holes on the external surface that have been patched (fig. 633, see vol. 1, ch. 4);

- a logical pattern of similar plugs or patches distributed over the entire bronze.

Chaplets are larger than core pins (fig. 533) and are often made of the same copper alloy as the cast. They do not always bond with the cast metal, in which case the outlines will be visible (see Case Study 3). Access to the internal surface is often key.[^33]

**Mold extensions** are usually large and systematically repaired (fig. 533; vol. 1, ch. 4).

*Risks of misidentification/misinterpretation*

- It may not be easy to distinguish patched or plugged core-pin holes from other repairs (see vol. 1, ch. 4).

- Core pins and chaplets are often well hidden by **chasing** and **patina**.

- Core supports may be difficult to see in radiographs because they are often made of materials of similar or of less density. As a consequence, it is often only possible to determine a partial distribution pattern of the core supports.

- Magnetic attraction may be due to an iron-rich alloy rather than indicating the presence of an iron core support (see §3.1.1).

### 3.2 Spruing and casting orientation

#### 3.2.1 Spruing system

Determining from a finished cast how the metal was fed through the mold is virtually impossible since in most finished bronzes, sprues tend to be cut off and the surface chased, making reconstruction of the spruing disposition difficult.[^34] On rare occasions the entire network including the casting cup is preserved. This can range from simple integrated designs (fig. 767), to the full, elaborate network preserved for demonstration purposes (fig. 923). In most cases only occasional traces survive. These can take in various forms:

.

- The occasional sprue may be preserved in their entirety, either on the outside of the bronze (fig. *905*) or incorporated as integral features of the sculpture. They may also survive intact on the inside of a bronze (fig. 903; see Case Study 1).

- More often, remnants of sprues survive only as small protuberances on the outer surface when they were cut off and only coarsely made level with the surrounding surface (fig. 26). Such remnants are found more readily along the bottom edges or inner or rear surfaces where removal is not as carefully executed (fig. 772).

- More rarely, **shrinkage**, **porosity** or differentiated corrosion due to microstructure differences[^35] may indicate where the sprues or gates were located.

- Core vents know as lanterns may be visible by radiography (see General intro §2.7.2).

*Risks of misidentification/misinterpretation*

- Some sculptural features/part of the decoration may be confused with remnants of a sprue.

- Differential corrosion may stem from a variety of reasons other than the aforementioned microstructural differences in sprue areas (fig. 577).

#### 3.2.2. Evidence of orientation of cast

It is a challenge to determine whether a sculpture was cast upside down, vertically, or horizontally, and whether the metal was poured directly into the sculpture or fed in a more controlled fashion by directing the metal to the bottom first (i.e., with an "indirect feed"). The following features may help to determine some of this, and are all considered casting defects (see also vol. 1, ch. 3):

- Gas porosity tends to form at the upper part of the sculpture during casting since bubbles rise. Any concentration of porosity may, therefore, be a good indication, as mainly seen using visual and/or radiographic examination (fig needed).

- Similarly, wash from the refractory mold---mainly from sand molds---will rise to the surface of the cope. The resulting floating debris would cause casting defects that can be easily recognized.[^36]

- Potential discrepancies in the lead content in the case of leaded alloys should see the heavier lead sinking to the bottom of the cast. In reality, it is nearly impossible to ascertain this through analysis.[^37]

*Risks of misidentification/misinterpretation*

- Corrosion pitting may be confused with gas porosity, notably, if localized on one particular area of the bronze (image needed).

- Surface cavities may originate from a variety of reasons, not just floating debris.

## 4 Why investigate casting processes and other FAQs

### 4.1 Can I tell whether a bronze is cast by the lost-wax or another method, and can I precisely figure out which variant has been used?

This is potentially possible, depending on conditions. See all the indications above, and bear in mind:

- the complexity of the process, which may be the result of a combination of several variants (for example, indirect and direct, see fig. 463);[^38]

- that different processes may produce similar features (see all "risks of misidentification/misinterpretation" above, and Case Study 5).[^39]

### 4.2 Can I determine more clearly how different casts relate (or not) to the same model?

Casts of the same model may be any number of things: part of an edition, replicas, **aftercasts**, etc. (see General Introduction, §1.3). Below are a few clues to find out the relationship between two casts:

- A reproduction of a repair in a cast, or misinterpretation of a feature suggests that a cast may be a later copy.[^40]

- Comparing measurements may reveal shrinkage and consequently suggest an aftercast (see vol. 2, ch. 4).

- Traces of the mold-making process may remain on the original statue, indicating that an aftercast has been taken (fig. 827).

> NB this evidence can point to the fact that other versions are likely to exist, but cannot identify the original bronze. However, replication of distinctive marks can point to a specific bronze original, such as lacunae filled during the aftercasting process (for example, suspension holes in medals).[^41]

### 4.3 Can I determine what the original model was made of?

This requires both traditional art historical research and close observation. Given the variety of intermediate models between the original and the finished bronze, unless the model is known, it is often impossible to do so. However:

- with direct lost-wax models, the answer is clearer (wax);

- life casts preserve the intricate texture of the model;

- tool marks may be diagnostic (figs. 477 and 683; vol. 1, ch. 6)

- some materials may be very specific (fig. 865).

### 4.4 Can different artists/founders/workshops be distinguished based on specific casting processes?

For such an assessment to be made, art historical (or archaeological) and technical data must be available in connection with a significant enough group of securely attributed, provenanced (in the case of archaeological materials) or dated, comparable bronzes. The specificity of a workshop's practices will be reflected in a combination of parameters in addition to the casting process (i.e., metal and core composition, chasing, patina, etc.). In cases where enough data is available the answers can vary. For instance:

- Certain idiosyncrasies seen in the interior and exterior surfaces of bronzes (as in subject matter and style),  allowed scholars to identify the work of particular antique foundries (Mattusch 2009). The technical evidence from some of Barthélemy Prieur's large bronzes (sixteenth-century France) tends to indicate these were produced in the same workshop (see Case Study 5). From the nineteenth century onwards, with a greater standardization in **foundry** practice, associating bronzes with particular workshops or foundries seems more plausible.

- Conversely, the standardization of processes on a large scale, for example, in late sixteenth- to seventeenth-century Venice may render a precise attribution complex.[^42]

It should be remembered that for various reasons artists and/or founders experiment. This seems to have been the case, for instance, with sculptors who were closely involved in the entire process, such as Donatello (Italian, [^43] or Jean-Antoine Houdon (French, 1741--1828)[^44] (see also Case Study 7).

### 4.5 What can be learned from understanding the original casting orientation?

It can help us better understand some of the defects and challenges faced by the founder. Certain orientations may be characteristic of a culture, region, or period. For instance, we have little evidence of horizontal casting so far in the West, but it is still current in South and South East Asia.[^45]

## 5 Checklist: how to investigate the casting technique {.fold-up}

The most important and readily available way of gathering information is close visual examination. This primary and necessary step in the investigation may be assisted by the following:

- Good lighting that can be shone at different angles over the surfaces to reveal the topography of tool marks and other features (see vol. 2, ch. 1 for guidance on lighting).

- Magnification through portable loops or binocular microscopy, which can help to characterize details in modeling, defects and flaws related to the forming of the model and of the mold.

- Small magnets for locating iron armatures or core pins that have not been removed, but may not be readily visible on the surface.[^46]

- A borescope (or endoscope), which can afford visual access to internal recesses of hollow casts that are otherwise impossible to reach, so as to reveal information about core pins, armature, and the forming of the core that mirrors that of the inner surface of the bronze (see vol. 2, ch. 1).

- Radiography, which---as seen throughout this chapter---is the source of invaluable information, especially when the interior is not readily accessible (see also vol. 2, ch. 3).

- 3D scanning, which might be useful for comparison of measurements with other pieces connected to the same model as it might help to establish the genealogical relationship between them (see vol. 2, ch. 4).

- A number of other techniques, including ultrasonic testing and thermography, which may be of use to track surface features related to several aspects of the casting process (holes left by armatures and/or core supports, etc.). For more, see vol. 2, ch. 3.

## Bibliography {.fold-up}

Bassett, Jane, and Guilhem Scherf. 2014. "Jean-Antoine Houdon: Sculptor and Founder." Edited by David Bourgarit, Jane Bassett, Francesca G. Bewer, Geneviève Bresc-Bautier, Philippe Malgouyres, and Guilhem Scherf. *French Bronze Sculpture*, 107--24.

Bassett, Jane and Francesca G. Bewer. 'The cut-back core process in late 17^th^- and 18^th^-century French Bronzes' in Bougarit et al. 2014, pp.205-14

Bearzi, Bruno. 1968. "Tecnica Fusoria Di Donatello." In *Donatello e Il Suo Tempo. Atti Del VIII Convegno Internazionale Di Studi Sul Rinascimento, Florence-Padua, 25 September - 1 October, 1966.*, 97--105. Florence: Istituto Nazionale di Studi sul Rinascimento, Palazzo Strozzi.

Bewer, Francesca G. and Molly MacNamara, "The Portrait Busts of *Cosimo I* and *Bindo Altoviti* from the Inside Out: Considerations on Cellini\'s Practice of the Art of Bronze Casting," in Marks of identity: new perspectives on sixteenth-century Italian sculpture, ed. Dimitrios Zikos, (Proceedings of Il nostro bel Cinquecento: Italian Sculpture of the Sixteenth Century symposium held at the Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum, November 2003), Boston and Pittsburgh.Bourgarit, David et al. *French Bronze Sculpture. Materials and Techniques 16^th^-18^th^ Century*, London 2014CAST:ING. 2019. "Angkorian Founders and Bronze Casting Skills. First Technical Investigation of the West Mebon Viṣṇu." *Bulletin de l'Ecole Française d'Extrême-Orient (BEFEO)* 104.Dillmann, P., and Maxime L'Héritier. 2007. "Slag Inclusion Analyses for Studying Ferrous Alloys Employed in French Medieval Buildings: Supply of Materials and Diffusion of Smelting Processes." *Journal of Archaeological Science* 34 (11): 1810--23.Formigli, Edilberto and Gerwulf Schneider 1993. "Antiche terre di fusione. Indagini archeometriche sulle terre di fusione di bronzi greci, roman.i e rinascimentali." In: *Antiche officine del bronzo -materiali, strumenti, tecniche*, Atti del seminario di studi ed esperimenti Murlo, 26-31 July, 1991. Edited by Formigli, E. Siena, 69-102. Formigli, Edilberto 1999. "Le antiche terre di fusione, I problem di formatura dei grandi bronzi e la tecnica di fusione dei bronzi di Riace." In: *I grandi bronzi antichi - dalla forma alla fusione*, Proceedings of the International Conference, Murlo, 1-7 July, 1995. Edited by Formigli, E. Siena, 67-74.Lebon, E. in press. "Sculptors-Founders in Late Nineteenth Century (France) - Role of Lost Wax Casting." In *Finding Lost Wax: The Disappearance and Recovery of an Ancient Casting Technique and the Experiments of Medardo Rosso*. Studies in Art and Materiality. Brill.---------. 2019. "Delhommeau." In *Bornze Sculpture of "Les Animaliers" 1900-1950*, edited by E. Horswel, 110--13. London: Sladmore Gallery.Mattusch, Carol C. 2009. "Guests, Hosts, and Politics at Herculaneum." In *New Perspectives on Etruria and Early Rome*, edited by Sinclair Bell and Helen Nagy, 264--73. Madison, Wisconsin: University of Wisconsin Press.Mechling, M., B. Vincent, P. Baptiste, and D. Bourgarit. 2019. "The Indonesian Bronze-Casting Tradition: Technical Investigations on Thirty-Nine Indonesian Bronze Statues (7th-- 11th c.) from the Musée National Des Arts Asiatiques--Guimet, Paris." *Bulletin de l'Ecole Française d'Extrême-Orient (BEFEO)* 104.Mille, Benoît. in prep. *D'une Amulette En Cuivre Aux Grandes Statues de Bronze, Évolution Des Techniques de Fonte à La Cire Perdue, de l'Indus à La Méditerranée, Du 5e Millénaire Au 5e Siècle Av. J.-C.* Paris: Boccard.Motture, Peta (ed.), *Large Bronzes in the Renaissance .... Etc.* 2003aMotture, Peta. 'The Production of Firedogs in the Renaissance' in Motture 2003a, pp.277-307.Motture, Peta, Emma Jones and Dimitrios Zikos (eds.), *Carvings, Casts and Collectors. The Art of Renaissance Sculpture* (2^nd^ edn.), London 2014.Motture, Peta. *The Culture of Bronze. Making and Meaning in Italian Renaissance Sculpture*, London 2019.Notis, R., and D.N. Wang. 2017. "Ancient Chinese Bronze Casting Methods: The Dilemma of Choice." *Material Research Society. MRS Advances 2* 2 (33--34): 1743--68. https://doi.org/10.1557/adv.2017.298.Pingeot, Anne. 2002. "Degas and His Castings." In *Degas Sculptures - Catalogue Raisonné of the Bronzes*, edited by J.S. Czestochowski and Anne Pingeot, 27--37. Memphis: The Torch Press and international Arts.Seelig -Teuwen, R., D. Bourgarit, and F. Bewer. 2014. "Barthélemy Prieur Fondeur, Son Atelier, Ses Méthodes de Travail." In *French Bronze Sculpture: Materials and Techniques 16th - 18th Century*, edited by D. Bourgarit, J. Bassett, F. G. Bewer, G. Bresc-Bautier, P. Malgouyres, and G. Scherf, 18--38. Paris: Archetype.Smith, Cyril Stanley and Martha Teach Gnudi (trans and eds), *The Pirotechnia of Vanoccio Biringuccio. The Classic Sixteenth-Century Treatise on Metals and Metallurgy*. New York 1990Smith, Pamela H., et Tonny Beentjes. « Nature and Art, Making and Knowing: Reconstructing Sixteenth-Century Life-Casting Techniques ». *Renaissance Quarterly* 63 (2010): 128‑79.Stone, R. E. « Antico and the development of bronze casting in Italy at the end of the Quattrocento ». *Metropolitan Museum Journal* 16 (1981): 87‑116.Stone, R. E. 2001. "A New Interpretation of the Casting of Donatelloﾒs Judith and Holofernes." In *Small Bronzes in the Renaissance*, edited by Pincus D, 55--67. Washington and New Haven.Stone, Richard E. 'Severo Calzetta da Ravenna and the Indirectly Cast Bronze', *Burlington Magazine* (Dec.2006), vol.CXLVIII, no.1245, pp.810-19.Strahan, Donna. 2019. "Debating the Use of Lost-Wax Casting in Ancient China." In *Debating the Use of Lost-Wax Casting in Ancient China*, 3--31. Forbes Lecture on Scientific Research in the Field of Asian Art. ??Thoury, Mathieu, Bertrand Mille, Tatiana Séverin-Fabiani, Luc Robbiola, Matthieu Refregiers, J-F Jarrige, and Loïc Bertrand. 2016. "High Spatial Dynamics-Photoluminescence Imaging Reveals the Metallurgy of the Earliest Lost-Wax Cast Object." *Nature Communications* 7. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms13356.

Exhibitions

New York 2006 \[Aquamanile, Peter Barnet & Pete Dandridge?\]

New York 2008

Riccio catalogue, Frick Museum

Paris-New York-Los Angeles 2008-9

Geneviève Bresc-Bautier and Giulhem Scherf, with James David Draper (eds), *Cast in Bronze. French Sculpture from Renaissance to Revolution* (Musée du Louvre; The Metropolitan Museum of Art; The J. Paul Getty Museum), Paris 2009

## Notes {.fold-up}

[^1]: Life casting and piece-mold casting (other than sand casting) will also be discussed. For a detailed description of the different processes, see the General Introduction.

[^2]: See the General Introduction, § 2.

[^3]: NB in many cases, access to the inside of a bronze may be impeded either by the shape and nature of the cast, or by the remains of core material.

[^4]: Warning:

[^5]: (Pingeot 2002; Lebon 2019)

[^6]: See General introduction §2.X for a description of the different lost-wax processes

[^7]: Andrew Lacey, pers. comm; see also Heginbotham 2014)

[^8]: The core may be built or filled in several steps thus possibly generating joins that may be seen on radiographs.

[^9]: Warning, the following are not definitive evidences of direct lost-wax, See Risks of misinterpratation below.

[^10]: (Pingeot 2002; Lebon 2019).

[^11]: See also the Italian sculptor Antico's 1519 reworking of casts for Isabella d'Este (made at the Gonzaga court in Mantua) from the same model and/or molds; Motture 2019, 164--67, with earlier refs.

[^12]: The direct slab process also yields very smooth internal contours.

[^13]: See, for example, the sculptor--founder Andrew Lacey's suggestion in relation to Andrea Riccio's *Shouting Horseman* (V&A: A.88-1910), cited in New York 2008, 79. n.50 (Peta Motture).

[^14]: Biringuccio et al. 1990, 230--31; Bassett and Bewer 2014; Motture 2019, 43.

[^15]: See General Introduction for a detailed description.

[^16]: See, for example, Donatello's *Judith and Holofernes*, bronze with traces of gilding, *c*.1455--60 (Palazzo della Signoria, Florence; see Stone 2001).

[^17]: One advantage of the technique---as for cut-back core---is that complex assemblies of wax sections may be avoided. However, the founder may still decide to cut the wax model (see for example fig. 540).

[^18]: For example, see Stone 1982, 113--14; New York 2006, 38 (Pete Dandridge); Sturman 2013, 13, describing how analysis of radiography of certain groups of replicated bronzes has led to the proposal that their cores were molded, and the wax applied over them using what may be considered a hybrid of the direct and indirect lost-wax processes; see also Motture 2019, 45--47 for summary. Falling between various indirect processes (lasagna and cut-back core, as well as slush molding and wax slab), and with unclear evidence as to how the wax was applied, the technique followed may generate a combination of features related to these and other processes. See also the 19^th^ c French Lebourg lost-wax process (CFL) which leads to features very similar to sand casts (Lebon in press)

[^19]: However, note the potential for shrinkage (see vol. 1, ch. 3 and vol. 2, ch. 4).

[^20]: See also Donatello's *Judith and Holofernes*, where the textile has been added to the wax model (Stone 2001)

[^21]: Examples include the numerous animal-shaped inkwells, often linked to North Italian Renaissance production. See also Thomas Eakin's collection of anatomical casts from dissection experiments now in the Philadelphia Museum of Art.

[^22]: Andrew Lacey, personal communication, June 2019, based on his experience with Pamela Smith on the "Making and Knowing" project.

[^23]: See, for example, Smith and Beentjes 2010.

[^24]: Andrew Lacey, personal communication with the authors, May 2019.

[^25]: See also Vocabulary.

[^26]: See vol. 2, ch. 4, although this chapter deals only with copper-alloy analysis. For iron analysis, refer to (Dillmann and L'Héritier 2007) as well as vol. 2, ch. 7 for dating of iron armatures.

[^27]: These are referred to as leashes in Stone 2006, 812. For examples in X-rays of Venetian bronzes, see Motture 2003, 295, fig. 21; Motture 2019, 46.

[^28]: Once a sculpture has been cast, the core and armature may be removed, or if not removed entirely, at least the parts of the armature that extend beyond the surface of the bronze are cut off flush with the surface. Also, some armatures may have been made of organic materials such as wood and burnt out or removed sometime after the sculpture was cast into metal (either before assembling separately cast parts, during fettling, or at some later stage); see GENERAL intro §2.6.2

[^29]: This is probably what happened for the four *Virtues* on the funerary monument of Henry II and Catherine de Médicis, Basilica of Saint-Denis: on three *Virtues* the main vertical armature has a round profile; on the fourth, the profile is hexagonal (Castelle 2016).

[^30]: See Case Study 5.

[^31]: 0.5wt% of iron in a copper or copper alloy is enough to stimulate a rare earth magnet, as notably witnessed on the West Mebon Vishnu (CASTING 2019).

[^32]: Armatures may also serve as core supports.

[^33]: For example, the specific chaplets evidenced in Prieur's cast could only be revealed by endoscopy (fig. 583, see Case Study 5).

[^34]: An exception is Andrew Lacey's experiments to reconstruct the potential (minimal) sprueing system of Andrea Riccio's *Satyr and Satyress* (V&A: A.8-1949); as yet unpublished.

[^35]: Cooling in those areas is slower because there is a greater volume of metal, thus impacting the microstructure (see vol. 1, chs. 2 and 7).

[^36]: Indian bronzes are cast facedown to ensure a perfect front; backs are messy and unfinished (after Donna Strahan). This is still the case, for instance, in sand casting with the important surface facing down into the drag versus the cope (David Reid, personal communication, 2019).

[^37]: There is little evidence to support this as an invariable phenomenon. For more see, for example, Motture 2019, 22 and 239, n.80.

[^38]: For example, direct lost-wax elements have even been found incorporated in traditional section-mold casts from the Eastern Zhou Spring and Autumn Period (770--476 BCE) at a transitional moment when lost-wax casting was slowly beginning to be adopted (D. Strahan 2019)

[^39]: It can be difficult to distinguish between lost wax and sand casts (for example, some casts of bronzes by Barye) as observed at the V&A: 65-1882 (S.Ex), which appears waxy, with a potential wax-to-wax join underneath, is sand cast, with flashing between two pieces of mold (notes made during Barye Study Day held at the V&A, 14--15 November 2002). It may also be worth noting that the distinction between piece-molding and lost --wax casting in ancient China has long been and is still a matter of debate among bronze specialists (Notis and Wang 2017)

[^40]: For example, in later versions of Barthélemy Prieur's *Gentleman* (or *Young Man holding a pair of gloves*), the gloves have been misunderstood and reproduced as an ill-defined block (examples in the Louvre and the Walters Art Gallery, Baltimore); see Paris--New York--Los Angeles 2008--2009, 142--47, cats. 31 and 32 (Regina Seelig-Teuwen); Motture 2019, 206 and 252, n.78.

[^41]: Numerous examples exist, but see, for example, V&A: A.44-1978: collections.vam.ac.uk/item/O312298/federico-zuccaro-medal-de-pastorini-pastorino/

[^42]: Motture 2003b.

[^43]: For an example of the creative variety of processes Donatello used, see notably the bronze sculptures of Saint Louis of Toulouse and of Judith and Holofernes (Bearzi 1968; Stone 2001)

[^44]: For example, Houdon's production in the final quarter of the 18th century in Paris (Bassett and Scherf 2014).

[^45]: (Mechling et al. 2019) and Case Study 4. Note that in modern art foundries, an edition may be cast after months or years of experimentation by the founder in search of the ideal sprues systems and casting orientation may change over this time (Andrew Lacey, personal communication, May 2019).

[^46]: Warning: some copper alloys may be magnetic, see §3.1.1.
